project_path: /web/_project.yaml
book_path: /web/fundamentals/_book.yaml
description: How to review your site for accessibility issues.


{# wf_updated_on: 2017-03-12 #}
{# wf_published_on: 2017-03-12 #}

# How To Do an Accessibility Review {: .page-title }

{% include "web/_shared/contributors/robdodson.html" %}

<div>
  <div class="video-wrapper">
    <iframe class="devsite-embedded-youtube-video" data-video-id="cOmehxAU_4s"
            data-autohide="1" data-showinfo="0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen>
    </iframe>
  </div>
Determining if your web site or application is accessible can seem like an
overwhelming task. If you are approaching accessibility for the first time, the
sheer breadth of the topic can leave you wondering where to start - after all,
working to accommodate a diverse range of abilities means there are a
correspondingly diverse range of issues to consider.

In this post, I'm going to break down these issues into a logical, step by step
process for reviewing an existing site for accessibility.
</div>

## Start with the keyboard
<img src="imgs/ic_keyboard_black_24px.svg" class="attempt-right" alt="" width="120"/>
For users who either cannot or choose not to use a mouse, keyboard navigation is 
their primary means of reaching everything on screen. This audience includes 
users with motor impairments, such as Repetitive Stress Injury (RSI) or 
paralysis, as well as screen reader users. For a good keyboarding experience 
aim to have a logical tab order and easily discernable focus styles.

### Key points

- Start by tabbing through your site. The order in which elements are focused
should aim to follow the DOM order. If you’re unsure which elements should
receive focus, see [Focus
Fundamentals](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/focus/)
for a refresher. The general rule of thumb is that any control a user can
interact with or provide input to should aim to be focusable and display a focus
indicator (e.g., a focus ring). It’s common practice to disable focus styles
without providing an alternative by using `outline: none` in CSS, but this is an
anti-pattern. If a keyboard user can’t see what’s focused, they have no way of
interacting with the page. If you need to differentiate between mouse and
keyboard focus for styling, consider adding a library like
[what-input](https://github.com/ten1seven/what-input).

- Custom interactive controls should aim to be focusable. If you use JavaScript
to turn a `<div>` into a fancy dropdown, it will not automatically be inserted
into the tab order. To make a custom control focusable, give it a
`tabindex=”0”`.

- Avoid controls with a `tabindex` > 0. These controls will jump ahead of
everything else in the tab order, regardless of their position in the DOM. This
can be confusing for screen reader users as they tend to navigate the DOM in a
linear fashion.

- Non-interactive content (e.g., headings) should avoid being focusable.
Sometimes developers add a `tabindex` to headings because they think they’re
important. This is also an anti-pattern because it makes keyboard users who can
see the screen less efficient. For screen reader users, the screen reader will
already announce these headings, so there’s no need to make them focusable.

- If new content is added to the page, try to make sure that the user’s focus is
directed to that content so they can take action on it. See [Managing Focus at
the Page
Level](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/focus/using-tabindex#managing_focus_at_the_page_level)
for examples.

- Beware of completely trapping focus at any point. Watch out for autocomplete
widgets, where keyboard focus may get stuck. Focus can be temporarily trapped in
specific situations, such as displaying a modal, when you don't want the user
interacting with the rest of the page - but you should aim to provde a
keyboard-accessible method of escaping the modal as well. See the guide on
[Modals and Keyboard
Traps](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/focus/using-tabindex#modals_and_keyboard_traps)
for an example.

### Just because something is focusable doesn’t mean it’s usable

If you’ve built a custom control, then aim for a user to be able to reach _all_
of its functionality using only the keyboard. See [Managing Focus In
Components](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/focus/using-tabindex#managing_focus_in_components)
for techniques on improving keyboard access.

### Don’t forget offscreen content

Many sites have offscreen content that is present in the DOM but not visible,
for example, links inside a responsive drawer menu or a button inside a modal
window that has yet to be displayed. Leaving these elements in the DOM can lead
to a confusing keyboarding experience, especially for screen readers which will
announce the offscreen content as if it’s part of the page. See [Handling
Offscreen
Content](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/focus/dom-order-matters#offscreen_content)
for tips on how to deal with these elements.

## Try it with a screen reader
<img src="imgs/ic_speaker_notes_black_24px.svg" class="attempt-right" alt="" width="100"/>

Improving general keyboard support lays some groundwork for the next step, which
is to check the page for proper labeling and semantics and any obstructions to
screen reader navigation. If you’re unfamiliar with how semantic markup gets
interpreted by assistive technology, see the [Introduction to
Semantics](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/semantics-builtin/)
for a refresher.

### Key points

- Check all images for proper `alt` text. The exception to this practice is when
images are primarily for presentation purposes and are not essential pieces of
content. To signify that an image should be skipped by a screen reader, set the
value of the `alt` attribute to an empty string, e.g., `alt=””`.

- Check all controls for a label. For custom controls this may require the use
of `aria-label` or `aria-labelledby`. See [ARIA Labels and
Relationships](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/semantics-aria/aria-labels-and-relationships)
for examples.

- Check all custom controls for an appropriate `role` and any required ARIA
attributes that confer their state. For example, a custom checkbox will need a
`role=”checkbox”` and `aria-checked=”true|false”` to properly convey its state.
See the [Introduction to
ARIA](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/semantics-aria/)
for a general overview of how ARIA can provide missing semantics for custom
controls.

- The flow of information should make sense. Because screen readers navigate the
page in DOM order, if you’ve used CSS to visually reposition elements, they may
be announced in a nonsensical sequence. If you need something to appear earlier
in the page, try to physically move it earlier in the DOM.

- Aim to support a screen reader’s navigation to all content on the page. Avoid
letting any sections of the site be permanently hidden or blocked from screen
reader access.

- If content _should_ be hidden from a screen reader, for instance, if it’s
offscreen or just presentational, make sure that content is set to
`aria-hidden=”true”`. Take a look at the guide on [Hiding
content](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/semantics-aria/hiding-and-updating-content#aria-hidden)
for further explanation.

### Familiarity with even one screen reader goes a long way

Though it might seem daunting to learn a screen reader, they’re actually pretty
easy to pick up. In general, most developers can get by with just a few simple
key commands.

If you’re on a Mac check out [this video on using
VoiceOver](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5R-6WvAihms&list=PLNYkxOF6rcICWx0C9LVWWVqvHlYJyqw7g&index=6),
the screen reader that comes with Mac OS. If you’re on a PC check out [this
video on using
NVDA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jao3s_CwdRU&list=PLNYkxOF6rcICWx0C9LVWWVqvHlYJyqw7g&index=4),
a donation supported, open source screen reader for Windows.

### aria-hidden does not prevent keyboard focus

It’s important to understand that ARIA can only affect the _semantics_ of an
element; it has no effect on the _behavior_ of the element. While you can make
an element hidden to screen readers with `aria-hidden=”true”`, that does not
change the focus behavior for that element. For offscreen interactive content,
you will often need to combine `aria-hidden=”true”` and `tabindex=”-1”` to make
sure it’s truly removed from the keyboard flow. The proposed [inert
attribute](https://github.com/WICG/inert) aims to make this easier by combining
the behavior of both attributes.

## Take advantage of headings and landmarks
<img src="imgs/ic_map_black_24px.svg" class="attempt-right" alt="" width="100"/>

Headings and landmark elements imbue your page with semantic structure, and
greatly increase the navigating efficiency of assistive technology users. Many
screen reader users report that, when they first land on an unfamiliar page,
they typically try to [navigate by
headings](http://www.heydonworks.com/article/responses-to-the-screen-reader-strategy-survey).
Similarly, screen readers also offer the ability to jump to important landmarks
like `<main>` and `<nav>`. For these reasons it’s important to consider how the
structure of your page can be used to guide the user’s experience.

### Key points

- Make proper use of `h1-h6` hierarchy. Think of headings as tools to create an
outline for your page. Don’t rely on the built-in styling of headings; instead,
consider all headings as if they were the same size and use the semantically
appropriate level for primary, secondary, and tertiary content. Then use CSS to
make the headings match your design.

- Use landmark elements and roles so users can bypass repetitive content. Many
assistive technologies provide shortcuts to jump to specific parts of the page,
such as those defined by `<main>` or `<nav>` elements. These elements have
implicit landmark roles. You can also use the ARIA `role` attribute to
explicitly define regions on the page, e.g., `<div role=”search”>`. See [the
guide on headings and
landmarks](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/semantics-builtin/navigating-content)
for more examples.

- Avoid `role=”application”` unless you have prior experience working with it.
The `application` landmark role will tell assistive technology to disable its
shortcuts and pass through all key presses to the page. This means that the keys
screen reader users typically use to move around the page will no longer work,
and you will need to implement _all_ keyboard handling yourself.

### Quickly review headings and landmarks with a screen reader

Screen readers like VoiceOver and NVDA provide a context menu for skipping to
important regions on the page. If you’re doing an accessibility check, you can
use these menus to get a quick overview of the page and determine if heading
levels are appropriate and which landmarks are in use. To learn more check out
these instructional videos on the basics of
[VoiceOver](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5R-6WvAihms&index=6&list=PLNYkxOF6rcICWx0C9LVWWVqvHlYJyqw7g)
and
[NVDA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jao3s_CwdRU&list=PLNYkxOF6rcICWx0C9LVWWVqvHlYJyqw7g&index=4).

## Automate the process
<img src="imgs/ic_build_black_24px.svg" class="attempt-right" alt="" width="100"/>

Manually testing a site for accessibility can be tedious and error prone.
Eventually you’ll want to automate the process as much as possible. This can be
done through the use of browser extensions, and command line accessibility test
suites.

### Key points

- Does the page pass all the tests from either the
[aXe](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/axe/lhdoppojpmngadmnindnejefpokejbdd)
or
[WAVE](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/wave-evaluation-tool/jbbplnpkjmmeebjpijfedlgcdilocofh)
browser extensions? These extensions are just two available options and can be a
useful addition to any manual test process as they can quickly pick up on subtle
issues like failing contrast ratios and missing ARIA attributes. If you prefer
to do things from the command line,
[axe-cli](https://github.com/dequelabs/axe-cli) provides the same functionality
as the aXe browser extension, but can be easily run from your terminal.

- To avoid regressions, especially in a continuous integration environment,
incorporate a library like [axe-core](https://github.com/dequelabs/axe-core)
into your automated test suite. axe-core is the same engine that powers the aXe
chrome extension, but in an easy-to-run command line utility.

- If you’re using a framework or library, does it provide its own accessibility
tools? Some examples include
[protractor-accessibility-plugin](https://github.com/angular/protractor-accessibility-plugin/)
for Angular, and
[a11ysuite](https://github.com/Polymer/web-component-tester#a11ysuite) for
Polymer and Web Components. Take advantage of available tools whenever possible
to avoid reinventing the wheel.

### If you’re building a Progressive Web App consider giving Lighthouse a shot
<img src="imgs/lighthouse.png" class="attempt-right" alt="" />

Lighthouse is a tool to help measure the performance of your progressive web
app, but it also uses the axe-core library to power a set of accessibility
tests. If you’re already using Lighthouse, keep an eye out for failing
accessibility tests in your report. Fixing these will help improve the overall
user experience of your site.

## Wrapping Up

Making accessibility reviews a regular part of your team process, and doing
these checks early and often, can help improve the overall experience of using
your site. Remember, good accessibility equals good UX!

### Additional Resources

- [Web Accessibility by Google](https://bit.ly/web-a11y)
- [Accessibility Fundamentals](/web/fundamentals/accessibility/)
- [A11ycasts](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLNYkxOF6rcICWx0C9LVWWVqvHlYJyqw7g)
