project_path: /web/_project.yaml
book_path: /web/updates/_book.yaml
description: Infinite scrollers are a common UI pattern. Here we explore how to implement this pattern in a memory conservative way that performs at 60fps.

{# wf_updated_on: 2017-11-07 #}
{# wf_published_on: 2016-07-01 #}
{# wf_tags: javascript,css #}
{# wf_featured_image: /web/updates/images/2016/07/infinite-scroller/featured.png #}

# Complexities of an Infinite Scroller {: .page-title }

{% include "web/_shared/contributors/surma.html" %}
{% include "web/_shared/contributors/flackr.html" %}

TL;DR: Re-use your DOM elements and remove the ones that are far away from the
viewport. Use placeholders to account for delayed data. Here’s a
[demo][Infscroller Demo] and the [code][Infscroller Code] for the infinite
scroller.

<div class="video-wrapper">
  <iframe class="devsite-embedded-youtube-video" data-video-id="zp3vDFgxGXI"
          data-autohide="1" data-showinfo="0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen>
  </iframe>
</div>

Infinite scrollers pop up all over the internet. Google Music’s artist list is
one, Facebook’s timeline is one and Twitter’s live feed is one as well. You
scroll down and before you reach the bottom, new content magically appears
seemingly out of nowhere. It’s a seamless experience for users and it’s easy to
see the appeal.

The technical challenge behind an infinite scroller, however, is harder than it
seems. The range of problems you encounter when you want to do The Right Thing™
is vast. It starts with simple things like the links in the footer becoming
practically unreachable because content keeps pushing the footer away. But the
problems get harder. How do you handle a resize event when someone turns their
phone from portrait to landscape or how do you prevent your phone from grinding
to a painful halt when the list gets too long?

## The right thing™

We thought that was reason enough to come up with a reference implementation
that shows a way to tackle all these problems in a reusable way while
maintaining performance standards.

We are going to use 3 techniques to achieve our goal: DOM recycling, tombstones
and scroll anchoring.

Our demo case is going to be a Hangouts-like chat window where we can scroll
through the messages. The first thing we need is an infinite source of chat
messages. Technically, none of the infinite scrollers out there are *truly*
infinite, but with the amount of data that is available to get pumped into these
scrollers they might as well be. For simplicity’s sake we will just hard-code a
set of chat messages and pick message, author and occasional image attachment at
random with a sprinkle of artificial delay to behave a little bit more like the
real network.

<img src="/web/updates/images/2016/07/infinite-scroller/screenshot.png">

## DOM recycling

DOM recycling is a underutilized technique to keep the DOM node count low. The
general idea is to use already created DOM elements that are off-screen instead
of creating new ones. Admittedly, DOM nodes themselves are cheap, but they are
not free, as each of them adds extra cost in memory, layout, style and paint.
Low-end devices will get noticeably slower if not completely unusable if the
website has too big of a DOM to manage. Also keep in mind that every relayout
and reapplication of your styles – a process that is triggered whenever a class
is added or removed from a node – grows more expensive with a bigger DOM.
Recycling your DOM nodes means that we are going to keep the total number of DOM
nodes considerably lower, making all these processes faster.

The first hurdle is the scrolling itself. Since we will only have a tiny subset
of all available items in the DOM at any given time, we need to find another way
to make the browser’s scrollbar properly reflect the amount content that is
theoretically there. We will use a 1px by 1px sentinel element with a transform
to force the element that contains the items – the runway – to have the desired
height. We will promote every element in the runway to their own layer to make
sure the layer of the runway itself completely empty. No background color,
nothing. If the runway’s layer is non-empty it is not eligible for the browser’s
optimizations and we will have to store a texture on our graphics card that has
a height of a couple of hundred thousand pixels. Definitely not viable on a
mobile device.

Whenever we scroll, we will check if the viewport has come sufficiently close to
the end of the runway. If so, we will extend the runway by moving the sentinel
element and moving the items that have left the viewport to the bottom of the
runway and populate them with new content.

<style>
  svg.infscroll {
    vector-effect: non-scaling-stroke;
  }
  svg * {
    vector-effect: inherit;
  }
  #browser .viewport {
    stroke: red;
    stroke-width: 4;
    fill: none;
  }

  #browser .viewport text {
    stroke: none;
    fill: red;
  }
  .whitener {
    stroke: none;
    fill: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.54);
  }
  #runway {
    stroke: url(#linear);
    stroke-width: 4;
    fill: none;
  }
  #runway + text {
    fill: blue;
    stroke: none;
  }

  .mscroller {
    stroke: green;
    stroke-width: 3;
    fill: none;
  }

  .mscroller text {
    fill: green;
    stroke: none;
  }

  .items > use {
    stroke: none;
    fill: grey;
  }

  #runway {
    animation: runway 4s infinite;
  }


  @keyframes runway {
    0% {
      transform: translateY(0px);
    }
    30%, 70% {
      transform: translateY(-60px);
    }
    80%, 100% {
      transform: translateY(0px);
    }
  }

  .items {
    animation: items 4s infinite;
  }

  @keyframes items {
    0% {
      transform: translateY(0px);
    }
    30%, 100% {
      transform: translateY(-60px);
    }
  }

  .items > use:first-child {
    animation: mscrollmove 4s infinite;
  }

  @keyframes mscrollmove {
    0%, 30% {
      transform: translateY(0px);
    }
    45%, 80% {
      transform: translate(-500px, 350px) scale(0.5);
    }
    90%, 100% {
      transform: translateY(900px);
    }
  }

  .mscroller {
    animation: mscroller 4s infinite;
  }

  @keyframes mscroller {
    0% {
      transform: translateY(0);
    }

    30%, 50% {
      transform: translateY(-60px);
    }

    60%, 100% {
      transform: translateY(0px);
    }
  }
</style>
<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" viewBox="-200 -400 1200 1400" class="infscroll" preserveAspectRatio="xMidYMid meet">
  <defs>
    <linearGradient id="linear" x1="0%" y1="0%" x2="0%" y2="1000%">
      <stop offset="0%"   stop-color="rgba(0, 0, 255, 0)"/>
      <stop offset="5%" stop-color="rgba(0, 0, 255, 1)"/>
    </linearGradient>
    <g id="item">
      <rect x="100" y="0" width="600" height="40" />
    </g>
  </defs>
  <g id="runway">
    <rect x="50" y="-500" width="700" height="1480" />
  </g><text x="40" y="34" transform="rotate(-90)" font-size="72">Runway</text>
  <g class="mscroller">
    <rect x="60" y="960" width="10" height="10" />
    <text x="-120" y="980" font-size="40">Sentinel</text>
  </g>
  <g class="items">
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="-120" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="-60" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="0" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="60" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="120" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="180" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="240" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="300" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="360" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="420" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="480" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="540" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="600" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="660" />
    <use xlink:href="#item" x="0" y="720" />
  </g>
  <g id="browser">
    <rect class="whitener" x="0" y="-600" width="800" height="600"/>
    <rect class="whitener" x="0" y="600" width="800" height="600"/>
    <rect class="whitener" x="-5000" y="-600" width="5000" height="1800"/>
    <rect class="whitener" x="800" y="-600" width="5000" height="1800"/>
    <g class="viewport">
      <rect x="0" y="0" width="800" height="600" />
      <text x="-600" y="-16" transform="rotate(-90)" font-size="72">Viewport</text>
    </g>
  </g>
</svg>

The same goes for scrolling in the other direction. We will, however, never
shrink the runway in our implementation, so that the scrollbar position stays
consistent.

## Tombstones

As we mentioned earlier, we try to make our data source behave like something in
the real world. With network latency and everything. That means that if our
users make use of flicky scrolling, they can easily scroll past the last element
we have data for. If that happens, we will place a tombstone item – a
placeholder – that will get replaced by the item with actual content once the
data has arrived. Tombstones are also recycled and have a separate pool for
re-usable DOM elements. We need that so we can make a nice transition from a
tombstone to the item populated with content, which would otherwise be very
jarring to the user and might actually make them lose track of what they were
focusing on.

<img src="/web/updates/images/2016/07/infinite-scroller/tombstone.png" alt="Such
tomb. Very stone. Wow.">

An interesting challenge here is that real items can have a bigger height than
the tombstone item because of differing amounts of text per item or an attached
image. To resolve this, we will adjust the current scroll position every time
data comes in and a tombstone is being replaced above the viewport, *anchoring*
the scroll position to an element rather than a pixel value. This concept is
called scroll anchoring.

## Scroll anchoring

Our scroll anchoring will be invoked both when tombstones are being replaced as
well as when the window gets resized (which also happens when the devices is
being flipped!). We will have to figure out what the top-most visible element in
the viewport is. As that element could only be partially visible, we will also
store the offset from the top of the element where the viewport begins.

<img src="/web/updates/images/2016/07/infinite-scroller/anchoring.png">

If the viewport is resized and the runway has changes, we are able to restore a
situation that feels visually identical to the user. Win! Except a resized
window means that each items has potentially changed its height, so how do we
know how far down the anchored content should be placed? We don’t! To find out
we would have to layout every element above the anchored item and add up all of
their heights; this could cause a significant pause after a resize, and we don’t
want that. Instead, we resort to assuming that every item above is the same size
as a tombstone and adjust our scroll position accordingly. As elements are
scrolled into the runway, we adjust our scroll position, effectively deferring
the layout work to when it is actually needed.

## Layout

I have skipped over an important detail: Layout. Each recycling of a DOM element
would normally relayout the entire runway which would bring us well below our
target of 60 frames per second. To avoid this, we are taking the burden of
layout onto ourselves and use absolutely positioned elements with transforms.
This way we can pretend that all the elements further up the runway are still
taking up space when in actuality there is only empty space. Since we are doing
layout ourselves, we can cache the positions where each item ends up and we can
immediately load the correct element from cache when the user scrolls backwards.

Ideally, items would only get repainted once when they get attached to the DOM
and be unfazed by additions or removals of other items in the runway. That is
possible, but only with modern browsers.

## Bleeding-edge tweaks

Recently, [Chrome added support for CSS Containment][Containment], a feature
that allows us developers to tell the browser an element is a boundary for
layout and paint work. Since we are doing layout ourselves here, it’s a prime
application for containment. Whenever we add an element to the runway, we *know*
the other items don’t need to be affected by the relayout. So each item should
be get `contain: layout`. We also don‘t want to affect the rest of our website,
so the runway itself should get this style directive as well.

Another thing we considered is using
[`IntersectionObservers`][IntersectionObserver] as a mechanism to detect when
the user has scrolled far enough for us to start recycling elements and load new
data. However, IntersectionObservers are specified to be high latency (as if
using `requestIdleCallback`), so we might actually *feel* less responsive with
IntersectionObservers than without. Even our current implementation using the
`scroll` event suffers from this problem, as scroll events are dispatched on a
“best effort” basis. Eventually, [Houdini’s Compositor Worklet][Compositor
Worklet] would be the high fidelity solution to this problem.

## It’s still not perfect

Our current implementation of DOM recycling is not ideal as it adds all elements
that *pass* through the viewport, instead of just caring about the ones that are
actually *on* screen. This means, that when you scroll *reaaally* fast, you put
so much work for layout and paint on Chrome that it can’t keep up. You will end
up seeing nothing but the background. It’s not the end of the world but
definitely something to improve on.

<div class="video-wrapper">
  <iframe class="devsite-embedded-youtube-video" data-video-id="2xq3YaKwve8"
          data-autohide="1" data-showinfo="0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen>
  </iframe>
</div>

We hope you see how challenging simple problems can become when you want to
combine a great user experience with high performance standards. With
Progressive Web Apps becoming first-class citizens on mobile phones, this will
become more important and web developers will have to continue investing into
using patterns that respect performance constraints.

All the code can be found in our [repository][Infscroller Code]. We have done
our best to keep it reusable, but won’t be publishing it as an actual library on
npm or as a separate repo. The primary use is educational.

[Infscroller Demo]: http://googlechromelabs.github.io/ui-element-samples/infinite-scroller/
[Infscroller Code]: https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/ui-element-samples/tree/gh-pages/infinite-scroller
[Containment]: https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2016/06/css-containment
[IntersectionObserver]: https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2016/04/intersectionobserver
[Compositor Worklet]: https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2016/05/houdini


{% include "comment-widget.html" %}
