---
layout: article
title: "Eliminating unnecessary downloads"
description: "Our web applications continue to grow in their scope, ambition, and 
              functionality - that's a good thing. However, the relentless march towards a 
              richer web is driving another trend: the amount of data downloaded by each 
              application continues to increase at a steady pace. "
introduction: "Our web applications continue to grow in their scope, ambition, and 
               functionality - that's a good thing. However, the relentless march towards a 
               richer web is driving another trend: the amount of data downloaded by each 
               application continues to increase at a steady pace. "
article:
  written_on: 2014-01-01
  updated_on: 2014-01-05
  order: 1
collection: optimizing-content-efficiency
key-takeaways:
  eliminate-downloads:
    - Inventory all your own and third party assets on your pages
    - Measure the performance of each asset: its value and its technical performance
    - Determine if the resources are providing sufficient value
  
---

{% wrap content%}

* Table of Contents
{:toc}

{% include modules/takeaway.liquid title="Key Takeaway" list=page.key-takeaways.eliminate-downloads %}

The fastest and best optimized resource is a resource not sent. Of course, this 
may seem like an obvious statement, but in practice it is all too often 
overlooked: as a performance engineer, it is your job to always maintain a 
critical eye for any opportunity to eliminate unnecessary resources from your 
application. It's a good practice to question, and periodically revisit, the 
implicit and explicit assumptions with your team. A few examples:

* We've always included resource X on our pages, but does the cost of 
  downloading and displaying it offset the value it delivers to the user? How do 
  we know if this resource / widget, is delivering value? Can we measure and 
  prove its value?
* Does the resource -- especially if it is a third party resource -- deliver 
  consistent performance? Is this resource in the critical path, or need to be? 
  If the resource is in the critical path, could it be a single point of failure 
  for our site - i.e. if the resource is unavailable, will it affect performance 
  and the user experience of our pages?
* Does this resource need or have an SLA? Does this resource follow performance 
  best practices: compression, caching, and so on?

All too frequently our pages contain resources which are unnecessary, or worse, 
hinder their performance without delivering much value to the visitor or the 
site they are hosted on. This applies equally to first-party and third-party 
resources and widgets:

* Site A has decided to display a photo carousel on its homepage to allow the 
  visitor to preview multiple photos with a quick click -- all the photos are 
  loaded when the page is loaded, and photos are advanced by the user. 
    * **Question: **have you measured how many users view multiple photos in the 
      carousel? You could be incurring high overhead by downloading unnecessary 
      resources which are never viewed by most visitors.
* Site B has decided to install a third-party widget to display related content, 
  improve social engagement, or provide some other service.
    * **Question:** have you tracked how many visitors use the widget or 
      click-through on the content provided by the widget? Is the engagement 
      generated by this widget enough to justify its overhead?

As you can see, while eliminating unnecessary downloads seems like a trivial 
statement, in practice it is anything but, as it often requires a lot careful 
thinking and measurement to make the call. In fact, for best results you should 
periodically inventory and revisit these questions for each and every asset on 
your pages. 

{% endwrap %}
